---
layout: post
title: Big 
date: 2026-06-16 17:22:00 +0800
---
> People show much more originality in solving problems than in deciding which problems to solve. Even the smartest can be surprisingly conservative when deciding what to work on. People who'd never dream of being fashionable in any other way get sucked into working on fashionable problems.
>
> One reason people are more conservative when choosing problems than solutions is that problems are bigger bets. A problem could occupy you for years, while exploring a solution might only take days. But even so I think most people are too conservative. They're not merely responding to risk, but to fashion as well. Unfashionable problems are undervalued.
>
> One of the most interesting kinds of unfashionable problem is the problem that people think has been fully explored, but hasn't. Great work often takes something that already exists and shows its latent potential. Durer and Watt both did this. So if you're interested in a field that others think is tapped out, don't let their skepticism deter you. People are often wrong about this.
>
> Working on an unfashionable problem can be very pleasing. There's no hype or hurry. Opportunists and critics are both occupied elsewhere. The existing work often has an old-school solidity. And there's a satisfying sense of economy in cultivating ideas that would otherwise be wasted.
>
> But the most common type of overlooked problem is not explicitly unfashionable in the sense of being out of fashion. It just doesn't seem to matter as much as it actually does. How do you find these? By being self-indulgent — by letting your curiosity have its way, and tuning out, at least temporarily, the little voice in your head that says you should only be working on "important" problems.
> 
> You do need to work on important problems, but almost everyone is too conservative about what counts as one. And if there's an important but overlooked problem in your neighborhood, it's probably already on your subconscious radar screen. So try asking yourself: if you were going to take a break from "serious" work to work on something just because it would be really interesting, what would you do? The answer is probably more important than it seems.
>
> Originality in choosing problems seems to matter even more than originality in solving them. That's what distinguishes the people who discover whole new fields. So what might seem to be merely the initial step — deciding what to work on — is in a sense the key to the whole game.
>
> \- [How to Do Great Work](https://paulgraham.com/greatwork.html)  

> Working on unimportant problems can create important side-effects.  
> A whole lot of mission-critical, world-changing and even life-saving tech is a by-product of "unimportant"
> things—time-wasting infotainment products, or personal pet projects started without a grand noble cause.  
>
> Important problems tend to imply a smallish scale, or heavy regulation, or both.  
> So you can't finance the work, and/or can't get any work done anyway.  
>
> And then there's a reason why so much of the best tech comes out of the least "important" markets. These markets are big, and they're free.  
> There's progress, of course, just nowhere near the progress in more frivolous areas – and much of the progress in "important" areas is a byproduct of progress in frivolous areas.  
>
> \- [Work on unimportant problems](https://yosefk.com/blog/work-on-unimportant-problems.html)  

[The Big Problem Paradox](https://conversableeconomist.com/2025/01/22/the-big-problem-paradox/)  
[The Bigger the Problem the Littler](https://psycnet.apa.org/fulltext/2025-38773-001.pdf)
