---
layout: post
title: Altruism
date: 2026-07-02 12:10:00 +0800
---
> If you genuinely believe something others don’t, that’s not a debate to win. That’s an edge. **The market rewards being right in a way that no argument ever will.** Instead of persuading the skeptic, ship the thing they think is wrong and let reality settle it. Their disagreement isn’t an obstacle; it’s your moat. If everyone already agreed with you, there’d be no opportunity left.  
>
> This is especially true if you’re starting your own company. **Differentiation is not a side effect of business, it is the business.** A startup exists precisely because its founders believe something the rest of the world hasn’t accepted yet. If you could win that argument in a meeting, it wouldn’t be worth a company. **The entire value lives in the gap between what you see and what others refuse to.**  
> 
> So I stopped trying to close that gap by talking. I started trying to profit from it by building. Let people disagree. **Their disagreement is where the money, and the meaning, is.**  
> 
> \- [Why I Stopped Arguing With People](https://wangcong.org/2026-06-30-why-i-stopped-arguing-with-people.html)  

> But this also presents an opportunity. **The tradeoffs forces you to focus on the things that you value more than the market.** Maybe you don’t think a 4th floor walk-up is more than a -$10,000 penalty for you, but the market values it as -$20,000: then in fact you should hone in and target exactly those apartments. As we will see with recruiting, the trick to figure out your own preference versus the market.  
>
> More generally, the conclusion when you’re hiring in a competitive market is that **even if you think some quality is desirable, if you think the market overvalues that quality, you should look at the other side of the spectrum.** This goes back to my example about buying a home.  
>
> The outcome is somewhat similar. Even though we prefer candidates from fancy schools, we still end of being better off hiring people from “average” schools. **Again, this is because the market systematically undervalues those. The fact that we consider B a “good” quantity is less relevant than the fact that we consider it less valuable than the market does.**  
>
> I want to be extra clear about what my conclusion here is. I’m not saying you should think of it as a bad thing that someone is coming from a fancy school. Everything else equals, it’s typically a good thing! What I’m saying is that if you’re hiring, then you will be more successful going after candidates that the market undervalues. And this doesn’t just apply to measurable things (what school they went to), but also things that people subconsciously value (eg. confidence of a candidate). On the other hand, overvaluingthings (that are less predictive of future work performance) can lead you to hire worse candidates. **In all these cases, it turns out your preference versus the market’s preference matters more than your preference in itself.**  
>
> \- [How to hire smarter than the market: a toy model](https://erikbern.com/2020/01/13/how-to-hire-smarter-than-the-market-a-toy-model)  

> One of the most important things for every investor to learn is that risk is not a function of asset quality... **I believe quite the opposite, A high quality asset can be priced so high that it's risky. On the other hand, a low quality asset can be cheap enough to be safe.**  
>
> If you bought those great companies the day I got to work in September 1969, and if you held their stocks tenaciously for the next five years, you lost more than 90% of your money because the prices paid were just too high and unsustainable.  
>
> The juxtaposition of these events taught me an important lesson that I want to share with you so that you don't have to learn it firsthand. **My conclusion was it's not what you buy is what you pay. And investment success doesn't come from buying good things, but from buying things well. And if you don't know the difference, you have to study up. No assets that are so good that they can't become overpriced and dangerous. There are very few assets that are so bad that they can't be cheap enough to be attractive as investments. So this is a simple concept, it sounds like to me, but I hope you'll spend a lot of time thinking about its consequences.**   
>
> \- [How to Think About Risk with Howard Marks](https://www.oaktreecapital.com/insights/insight-video/education/how-to-think-about-risk-with-howard-marks)  

> If you remove all the TV’s that are dominated by another TV, you end up with the Pareto frontier. These are the TV’s that are the only meaningful choices.  
>
> A simple model for why buying decisions are so hard is that it involves Pareto efficiency – market economy will drive out all TV’s that are dominated, leaving only the TV’s on the Pareto frontier.  
>
> The closer you get to the Pareto frontier (of the space of possible solutions), the harder it is to make any decision Pareto efficient. Meaning for almost all decisions, you’re going to have to sacrifice something.  
>
> \- [Pareto efficency](https://erikbern.com/2016/10/25/pareto-efficiency)  

> It turns out there’s in two places. Nothing more, nothing less: 1. Incentive problems (agents do not want to act in the organization’s interests) 2. Bounded rationality problems (agents do not have the necessary information to do so)"  
>
> As a manager the best way to get value out of other people is to: 1. Make sure people’s interests are aligned with the company’s 2. Make sure everyone in the team has the necessary information they need  
>
> \- [Why organizations fail](https://erikbern.com/2016/04/18/why-organizations-fail)  

> High σ means high uncertainty — more like a research lab — and means large risks of a huge blowup, which also means we should abandon lots of projects.  
> because anything predictable suggests something is redundant and should be factored out.  
>
> \- [σ-driven project management: when is the optimal time to give up?](https://erikbern.com/2022/04/05/sigma-driven-project-management-when-is-the-optimal-time-to-give-up)  

> Berkson's paradox occurs when this observation appears true when in reality the two properties are unrelated—or even positively correlated—because members of the population where both are absent are not equally observed.  
> Berkson's negative correlation is an effect that arises within the dating pool: the rude men that Alice dates must have been even more handsome to qualify, and the ugly men even more nice.  
> Two independent events become conditionally dependent given that at least one of them occurs.  
>
> \- [Berkson's paradox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkson%27s_paradox)  



> The deep question of social epistemology—the genuine puzzle—is not why people hold false beliefs. It is why people sometimes form true beliefs.  
> We will think—mistakenly—that ignorance and misperceptions are aberrations that require deep explanations, when they are instead the default state humanity will revert to in the absence of improbable and precarious norms and institutions.  
> the truth is not the default when people form beliefs about the world beyond their immediate material and social environment.  
>
> \- [Why do people believe true things?](https://www.conspicuouscognition.com/p/why-do-people-believe-true-things)  

> I will argue that much of our social behaviour is rooted in reputation management and that the subtle incentives of reputation management explain why human altruism is both sincere and strategic.  
>
> \- [Strategic Altruism: The Machiavellian Roots of Human Kindness](https://www.conspicuouscognition.com/p/strategic-altruism-the-machiavellian)

> The companies that couldn't beat Microsoft have all died, and evolution has resulted in three very different types of companies that are each immune to Microsoft's strategies in their own way. Yet all are still vulnerable to the same thing: a better product.  
> Beating Microsoft by not needing money
> Beating Microsoft by not allowing vendor lock-in
> Beating Microsoft just by being better
>
> \- [Evolution in the species "companies"](https://ln.hixie.ch/?start=1196942823&count=1)  

> People will earlier or later adopt GPT technologies to solve problems on Productivity Hill and get significant value out of it.  
> In Tug-of-War Valley most of the benefits of using GPT will be canceled out by an opposing force also using GPT.  
> The only way to get to the ‘Basin of Success’ (and therefore a Level III GPT application) is to build up a moat that generic GPT-applications can’t or won’t compete on directly.  
>
> \- [The "Three-Hills" Model for evaluating GPT startups](https://assistedeverything.substack.com/p/the-three-hills-model-for-evaluating)  

[The hacker's guide to uncertainty estimates](https://erikbern.com/2018/10/08/the-hackers-guide-to-uncertainty-estimates)  
[Never attribute to stupidity what opportunity cost explains](https://erikbern.com/2020/03/10/never-attribute-to-stupidity-that-which-is-adequately-explained-by-opportunity-cost)  
